QUESTION-29: What is sensor calibration and why is it important in IoT systems? How would you calibrate an analog soil moisture sensor to give accurate percentage readings? Describe the two-point calibration method.

Sensor Calibration

Sensor calibration is the process of comparing a sensor’s output with a
known reference value and adjusting its readings so that the measured
value is as accurate as possible.

Why is Calibration Important in IoT Systems?

Calibration is important because it: - Improves measurement accuracy. -
Reduces sensor errors caused by manufacturing differences. - Ensures
reliable data for IoT decision-making. - Increases consistency between
multiple sensors. - Prevents incorrect automation (e.g., wrong
irrigation decisions).

Calibration of an Analog Soil Moisture Sensor

An analog soil moisture sensor outputs an analog value (typically 0–1023
on an Arduino UNO). Since different sensors and soil types produce
different readings, calibration is required.

Two-Point Calibration Method

The two-point calibration method uses two known reference conditions.

1. Dry Soil Reading (0% Moisture)

-   Keep the sensor completely dry (or in air).
-   Record the analog value. Example: Dry Reading = 850

2. Wet Soil Reading (100% Moisture)

-   Insert the sensor into fully saturated soil or water.
-   Record the analog value. Example: Wet Reading = 350

These two values become the calibration limits.

Convert Analog Reading to Moisture Percentage

Use Arduino’s map() function:

int moisturePercent = map(sensorValue, 850, 350, 0, 100);
moisturePercent = constrain(moisturePercent, 0, 100);

Example

Sensor Value Moisture (%) 850 0% (Dry) 600 50% 350 100% (Wet)

Calibration Steps

1.  Connect the soil moisture sensor to the Arduino.
2.  Measure and record the dry sensor value.
3.  Measure and record the wet sensor value.
4.  Replace these values in the map() function.
5.  Test the sensor with different soil moisture levels.
6.  Fine-tune the calibration values if needed.

Advantages of Two-Point Calibration

-   Simple and easy to perform.
-   Improves measurement accuracy.
-   Compensates for sensor-to-sensor variation.
-   Provides moisture readings directly in percentage (0–100%), making
    them easy to use in IoT applications such as automatic irrigation
    systems.


